## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Ecological and evolutionary researchers have become critically dependent on computional code to achieve scientific elaboration.
With this, the use of efficient forms to collaborate, share and reproduce code has become fundamental. 
GitHub is an online, cloud-based service that can help researchers to track, organize, discuss, share and collaborate on software and code.
While scientists in natural sciences have been encouraged to use GitHub, its adoption is not widespread due to the lack of domain-specific information and guidelines.
To help ecology and evolutionary researchers adopt useful features from Github in their own workflows, we review thirteen practical ways to use the platform.
We outline features ranging from low to high technical difficulty: storing code, managing projects, coding collaboratively, conducting peer review, and writing a manuscript.
Because not all GitHub features are essentially useful for every researcher, we allocate existing development and collaborative workflows within Github -- such as, tracking tasks, discussing edits to a manuscript, and submitting code to a repository -- to the most common research development roles in ecology and evolution (project manager, coauthor, code contributor).
As more ecologists and evolutionary biologists migrate their workflows to GitHub, the broader scientific community stands to benefit from disciplines that push the boundaries of collaborative, transparent, and open research.