## Twelve practical ways GitHub can accelerate research in ecology and evolution

### Storing and sharing research compendia

<!--*contributors to this section: Dylan Gomes, Emma Hudgins, Pedro Braga, Katherine Hébert* -->
An EEB research compendium includes all computational materials related to research production, including data, code for analyses and protocols. 
Safely storing these files is essential to protect against accidental modifications or deletions.
Many researchers begin using GitHub to backup their research compendium [@doi:10.1080/00031305.2017.1375986] into a centralized, readily-available remote server (see [Box 1](#definitions)).
This practice has the advantages of facilitating collaboration, integrating data and code archiving, allowing file versions to be accessed and restored, and further contributing to open science practices (@doi:10.1162/99608f92.9497f68e).
Every change made to files in version-controlled repositories accompany authored descriptions of modifications ([Box 1](#definitions)).
Later, the entire history of commits and their commit messages are viewable and can be audited, similarly as with physical laboratory notebooks [@doi:10.1186/1751-0473-8-7].
GitHub allows administrative control over who can make modify repositories, and the process of cloning, forking and suggesting changes through pull requests (see [Box 1](#definitions)) ensures code owners have full control over code and documents.
Repositories can be changed from public to private, allowing data storage and management without sacrificing the privacy that may be necessary in certain compendia.
With this, researchers can grant collaborators read and/or write access to files in private repositories to pursue pre-publication analyses or writing in privacy.

GitHub limits committed file sizes to 100 Mb (megabytes) [@url:https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/about-large-files-on-github], which may require external file storage alternatives (such as local or cloud-hosting) for some parts of research compendia.
However, users can still track versions of remotely- or locally-stored files in their repositories using Git Large File Storage (<https://git-lfs.github.com>).

### Project continuity

<!--*Contributors to this section: BPME, VF, PHPB  -->

Projects in ecology and evolution often involve research professionals holding limited-term positions, such as graduate students, research assistants, and post-doctoral fellows [@doi:10.5334/jors.307].
Without clear plans on project continuity, the research code and data management upkeep tend to fall off as researchers move on to new projects or other institutions.
Additionally, code and data can be difficult to access when kept only on personal devices  [@doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.014].

GitHub can facilitate project continuity among research code by making code handover easier [@doi:10.5334/jors.307; @doi:10.1186/1751-0473-8-7].
Through version control, the history of code and data from projects in ecology and evolution can be tracked accessible to future laboratory members and collaborators [@doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0160].
Repositories and organizations can have designated data and code owners [or more appropriate, stewards; see @doi:10.1890/ES14-00402.1, @url:https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners], who can also change through time allowing for the transition of code between research cohorts (see also ["Organizing and managing teams"](#organizations)).
Other project collaborators can contribute to repository design and development, and their active involvement can both aid authors ability to act as guarantors of the project, and the clarity and reproducibility of the project for future users.
In (Figure @fig:github-diagram), we highlight several elements of good repository structure, and the various ways that contributors may interact with them.

GitHub also allows users to describe and store information about software and code dependencies, ensuring that code can run using the same version of software as when it was initially developed.
This can be achieved through the access of GitHub repositories containing the necessary releases of such software, or through the use of automated Github Actions with specific software versions.

GitHub can facilitate lab continuity by being used as a platform for storing, selectively sharing, and easily updating lab policies and experimental protocols. 
Researchers have been increasingly using GitHub to maintain versions and share digital laboratory handbooks across many fields [@doi:10.1038/538127a], including applied ecology (_e.g._, <https://scheuerell-lab.github.io/lab-book>), biogeography and global change biology (_e.g._, <https://github.com/HuckleyLab/how_we_work>), and microbial ecology (_e.g._, <https://github.com/CarBBAS/uqam-guide>). 


### Project management

<!--*Contributors to this section: Kaitlyn Gaynor, Rob Crystal-Ornelas, Pedro Braga*-->

Modern research in ecology and evolution is highly collaborative, bringing together multidisciplinary teams from various institutions [@doi:10.1890/120370].
On GitHub, collaborators can share feedback, brainstorm ideas, and troubleshoot problems (Figure @fig:github-diagram).
Project management can happen via three GitHub repository features: "Issues", "Discussion" and "Projects" ([Box 1](#definitions)).
Github Issues allow for discrete tasks and sub-tasks to be identified, assigned to team members, and categorized with custom labels.
Github Discussions serve as a message board for conversation.
Finally, GitHub Projects provides users with real-time tracking of project priorities and status [@url:https://docs.github.com/en/issues/trying-out-the-new-projects-experience/about-projects].
For instance, one can create a discussion on a project repository to decide which method to apply for biodiversity data analysis.
Then, an issue can be created to establish steps and responsibilities including data formatting, statistical analyses, figure generation, and issue resolution [_e.g._, see issues and discussions in the sPlotOpen manuscript repository, @doi:10.1111/geb.13346]; @url:https://github.com/fmsabatini/sPlotOpen_Manuscript/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed].
Using GitHub for all project-related conversation and planning, rather than email or messaging tools, makes it easier to keep track of progress throughout the lifespan of a project. 
However, one can opt to receive new issues, discussions, and responses as emails and can post replies by email as well.  
This allows for centralized communication for a team even when some members prefer to use email for communication.
Unlike emails and messages which can get lost as more new tasks arise, GitHub issues are intentionally closed by repository administrators hiding the issue from view (closed issues remain accessible but not immediately visible).

### Educational materials

<!-- *contributors to this section: Cole Brookson* -->

GitHub supports a broad set of mechanisms for hosting educational materials.
The entire process of running a course, workshop, or lecture, can all be done openly on GitHub including material development, web hosting, and delivery, and even submission and grading of assignments.
While there are other purpose-built platforms for this, GitHub provides a free, open-source alternative.

Syllabi, presentations, and other course materials can be version-controlled and stored in GitHub. 
Although plain text formats such as markdown or HTML work best with GitHub and help to keep the total size of the repository within limits, any file type can be stored on and downloaded from GitHub including PowerPoint and Word documents.
Content can then be delivered by sharing a link to the GitHub repository or creating a template repository with assignments that students can use.
Using GitHub to host a course website is also an option for making course content more widely and easily accessible (see [Hosting a Website](#hosting-a-website)).

Using GitHub to collect student submissions is more advanced, but the new GitHub Classroom tool (<https://classroom.github.com>) allows instructors to host private assignments to be submitted collaboratively or individually as code or PDF files, and even build auto-grading tests.
Using GitHub for course management may take an additional time investment compared to traditional tools, but integrating version control and GitHub into course content can boost students' feelings of self-efficacy and confidence [@doi:10.1187/cbe.13-12-0241]. <!-- connection to this ref is tenuous.  I think I edited away the connection at some point.  Can someone help out here?-->
