## Figures {.page_break_before}

![An overview of Git's core features. A) Multi-faceted components allow for code writing, small data storage, manuscript writing, and project management to all be done in one place. `CONTRIBUTING.md`, `LICENCE.md`, and `README.md` files allow new team members, or others wanting to use materials, to understand the project components and learn how they can engage with the project and existing team members. B) Issues, Pull Requests, Discussions, and Projects allow for team members to ask for feedback, suggest fixes, discuss related ideas, and keep track of all the moving parts of a project. C) All collaborators on a project can be a part of a single repository, with varying push privileges and responsibilities.](images/Figure1.png){#fig:github-diagram}

<!--Reference this figure in text like this (Figure @fig:github-diagram).-->

![A summary of ways GitHub can be used showing technical difficulty and degree of collaboration for each. Activities higher on the vertical axis require usage knowledge of more GitHub features than activities lower on the axis.  On the horizontal axis, each activity spans a region representing who is potentially involved with or benefits from each activity.  For example, storing data and code mainly benefits individual researchers or members of a laboratory while making data and code citable and reproducible benefit other labs and the larger community as well. Independently of ones knowledge of GitHub features, there are ways to use GitHub that allow tapping unto one of the strongest benefits of the platform: facilitating and enhancing collaboration. For information on the methods and the data used to create this figure, see Appendix S1.1, Appendix S1.2, and Tables S1.1 and S1.2.](images/scatterblob_1-viridis-turbo.png){#fig:scatterblob}

<!--Reference this figure in text like this (Figure @fig:scatterblob).-->

## Tables
